Numba dynamic guvectorize post (#152)
Quansight-Labs/quansight-labs-site: posts/2021/01/enhancements-to-the-guvectorize-decorator.md

<!--
.. title: Enhancements to the guvectorize decorator
.. slug: enhancements-to-the-guvectorize-decorator
.. date: 2021-01-20 08:00:00 UTC-00:00
.. author: Guilherme Leobas
.. tags: Labs, Numba
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
-->

Starting on Numba 0.53, Numba will ship with an enhanced version of the `@guvectorize` decorator. Similar to the [@vectorize](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/dev/user/vectorize.html#the-vectorize-decorator) decorator, [@guvectorize](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/dev/user/vectorize.html#the-guvectorize-decorator) now has two modes of operation: 

- Eager, or decoration-time compilation and
- Lazy, or call-time compilation

Before, only the eager approach was supported. In this mode, users are required to provide a list of concrete supported types beforehand as its first argument. Now, this list can be omitted if desired and as one calls it, Numba dynamically generates new kernels for previously unsupported types.

<!-- TEASER_END -->

## NumPy Universal Functions

> NumPy introduces a type of function called Universal functions or ufuncs. Ufuncs are functions that operate on `ndarrays` element-by-element. [Examples](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/ufuncs.html#available-ufuncs) of universal functions are `np.log` and `np.log2`, which compute the natural and base-2 logarithms, respectively. Alongside ufuncs, NumPy also introduces the notion of generalized ufuncs or gufuncs. While the former is limited to element-by-element operations, the latter supports sub-array by sub-array operations at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NumPy introduces a type of function called Universal functions or ufuncs. Ufuncs are functions that operate on `ndarrays` element-by-element. [Examples](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/ufuncs.html#available-ufuncs) of universal functions are `np.log` and `np.log2`, which compute the natural and base-2 logarithms, respectively. Alongside ufuncs, NumPy also introduces the notion of generalized ufuncs or gufuncs. While the former is limited to element-by-element operations, the latter supports subarray-by-subarray operations.
```

Creating new NumPy ufuncs is not an easy process and may require one to [write some C code](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/user/c-info.ufunc-tutorial.html). Numba extends the NumPy mechanism for registering and using (generalized) universal functions with two decorators: `@vectorize` and `@guvectorize`. Those decorators allow one to easily create universal functions from Python, leaving the gruntwork to Numba.

> For instance, consider the function `guvec`, which adds a scalar to every element in an array:

Reviewer: It would be worth mentioning the caveat that `@guvectorize`d functions have to have the return array passed in as an argument.

```python
# examples taken from https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/latest/user/vectorize.html
from numba import guvectorize, int64
import numpy as np

@guvectorize([(int64[:], int64, int64[:])], '(n),()->(n)')
def guvec(x, y, res):
    for i in range(x.shape[0]):

>         res[i] = x[i] + y

Reviewer: I guess this is from the NumPy docs, but I don't understand this example. Isn't this something that could be done with @vectorize as well?

Author: Actually, this example is from the [numba docs](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/dev/user/vectorize.html#the-guvectorize-decorator). And yes, I guess one could do the same with `@vectorize`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth changing then?

Reviewer: Yes, I meant numba, not numpy.

Author: I've updated the example

Reviewer 2: @asmeurer can you double check the new example?

```python
>>> x_f = np.arange(5, dtype=np.float)
>>> y_f = 10.0
>>> res_f = np.zeros_like(x_f)
>>> dyn_guvec(x_f, y_f, res_f)
>>> dyn_guvec.types  # shorthand for dyn_guvec.ufunc.types
['ll->l', 'dd->d']
```

## Current limitations

In NumPy, it is fine to omit the output argument when calling a generalized ufunc.

```python
>>> a = np.arange(10).reshape(5, 2)
>>> b = 10
>>> guvec(a, b)
array([[10, 11],
       [12, 13],
       [14, 15],
       [16, 17],
       [18, 19]])
```

The same is not possible in a dynamic ufunc. Numba would have to guess the output type and shape to correctly generate code based on the input and signature.

```python
>>> dyn_guvec(a, b)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
  File "path/to/numba/np/ufunc/gufunc.py", line 134, in __call__
    raise TypeError(msg)
TypeError: Too few arguments for function 'dyn_guvec'. Note that the pattern `out = gufunc(Arg1, Arg2, ..., ArgN)` is not allowed. Use `gufunc(Arg1, Arg2, ..., ArgN, out) instead.
```

## Next steps

> In the future we would like to bring `@guvectorize` capabilities closer to the `@vectorize` one. For instance, currently it is not possible to call a guvectorize function from a jitted (`@jit`) function. Some work needs to be done towards this direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the future we would like to bring the `@guvectorize` capabilities closer to the `@vectorize` ones. For instance, currently it is not possible to call a guvectorize function from a jitted (`@jit`) function. Some work needs to be done in this direction.
```

> We would like to thank the [D.E. Shaw group](https://www.deshaw.com/) for sponsoring this work.

Reviewer: Presumably the wording of this blurb should be signed off by DEShaw, if it wasn't already. This is worded differently from other blurbs we used in the past.

Author: Got a new one from Eric and Troy

<!--

> .. title: Enhancements to the guvectorize decorator

Reviewer 2: The title is a bit cryptic. How about "Enhancements to Numba's guvectorize decorator" ?

.. slug: enhancements-to-the-guvectorize-decorator
.. date: 2021-01-20 08:00:00 UTC-00:00
.. author: Guilherme Leobas
.. tags: Labs, Numba
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
-->

> Starting on Numba 0.53, Numba will ship with an enhanced version of the `@guvectorize` decorator. Similar to the [@vectorize](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/dev/user/vectorize.html#the-vectorize-decorator) decorator, [@guvectorize](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/dev/user/vectorize.html#the-guvectorize-decorator) now has two modes of operation: 

Reviewer 2: "starting from" maybe?
